Tanssi overview revisited (#322)
moondance-labs/tanssi-docs: learn/tanssi/overview.md

---
title: Overview
description: Tanssi is an infrastructure protocol that simplifies the process of deploying decentralized appchains, allowing developers to focus on creating their product.
icon: octicons-home-24
categories: Basics
---

# What is Tanssi? {: #what-is-tanssi }

Tanssi is a decentralized appchain infrastructure protocol that allows developers to launch their appchain in minutes. In other words, Tanssi reduces the six-to-twelve-month setup process typically required for any team to go live with a new chain to minutes.

You can think of Tanssi as _AWS for appchains_. Instead of dealing with all the networking infrastructure yourself, Tanssi handles all the hurdles, allowing you to focus on building your application logic, growing your community, and other tasks essential to your product's success.

> Security is another major pain point that developers have to deal with, taking on the responsibility of sourcing economic security and bootstrapping a validator set, which can be particularly challenging for projects in their early stages. All Tanssi-powered appchains benefit from Ethereum-grade security right from the start, and by leveraging Tanssi's decentralized design, appchains aren't exposed to single points of failure. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Security is another significant obstacle that developers must deal with, taking on the responsibility of securing economic stability and bootstrapping a validator set, which can be particularly challenging for projects in their early stages. All Tanssi-powered appchains benefit from Ethereum-grade security right from the start, and by leveraging Tanssi's decentralized design, appchains aren't exposed to single points of failure.
```

Author: In this case, rather than _stability_ I'm trying to explain that to secure a blockchain you need to source a high amount of assets to lock up as collateral. In Tanssi's case, it's around 600M usd and that's the economic security every appchain gets from the start

Tanssi-powered appchains also benefit from a modular tech stack, providing ultimate control over the logic that powers the blockchain's runtime, offering an excellent way for projects to scale and build optimized solutions for their products. This complete control over the appchain's logic and governance mechanism suits perfectly a wide range of use cases, including DeFi Protocols, Real World Assets (RWA), Gaming Platforms, and others.

## The Problem with Appchains {: #the-problem-with-appchains }

Developers looking to build decentralized appchains typically have to deal with the following problems:

> - **Complex Infrastructure Management**: appchain deployments typically demand handling numerous infrastructural components like bootstrapping sequencers, operators (also called validators), wallets, block explorers, oracles, indexers, RPC endpoints, and more. This is both time-consuming and resource-intensive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Complex Infrastructure Management**: Appchain deployments typically require handling numerous infrastructural components, including bootstrapping sequencers, operators (also known as validators), wallets, block explorers, oracles, indexers, RPC endpoints, and more. Properly managing these components are both time-consuming and resource-intensive.
```

> - **Weak & Inefficient Security**: appchains commonly suffer from having a small set of operators or weak economic security. Early-stage projects don't have enough economic backing to power a robust consensus mechanism. Moreover, developers often have to pay for full blockchain capacity validation even when they might not have achieved product-market fit, and blocks might be close to empty. This essentially means operators are being overpaid, and there is a large opportunity cost since those resources could be used elsewhere to develop the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Weak & Inefficient Security**: Appchains commonly suffer from having a small set of operators or weak economic security. Early-stage projects often lack sufficient economic backing to support a robust consensus mechanism. Moreover, developers often have to pay for full blockchain capacity validation even when they might not have achieved product-market fit, and blocks might be close to empty. This essentially means that operators are being overpaid, and there is a significant opportunity cost, as those resources could be used elsewhere to develop the protocol.
```

> - **Cross-Chain and Interoperability**: appchains inherently lack cross-chain capabilities to connect to other blockchain ecosystems. Furthermore, developing interoperability solutions requires specialized expertise and meticulous implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cross-Chain and Interoperability**:  Appchains inherently lack cross-chain capabilities, which prevents them from connecting to other blockchain ecosystems. Furthermore, developing interoperability solutions requires specialized expertise and meticulous implementation.
```

> - **Slow Time to Market**: the complexities of appchain infrastructure divert developers' focus from application logic, which is the key driver for intuitive interfaces and a seamless user experience, critical for adoption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Slow Time to Market**: The complexities of appchain infrastructure divert developers' focus from application logic, which is the key driver for intuitive interfaces and a seamless user experience, critical for adoption.
```

## What Tanssi Provides {: #what-tanssi-provides}

Tanssi addresses the most common appchain pain points by:

> - **Sequencing as a Service**: appchains built with Tanssi have their blocks produced by Tanssi's incentivized workers. Tanssi guarantees the appchain's liveness by orchestrating a decentralized set of sequencers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Sequencing as a Service**: Appchains built with Tanssi have their blocks produced by Tanssi's incentivized workers. Tanssi guarantees the appchain's liveness by orchestrating a decentralized set of sequencers.
```

> - **Economic Security Through External Providers**: appchains deployed through Tanssi leverage security from a provider of choice (for example, [Symbiotic](https://symbiotic.fi/){target=\_blank} for Ethereum). The protocol is designed to finalize transactions deterministically in seconds through a decentralized set of operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Economic Security Through External Providers**: Appchains deployed through Tanssi leverage security from a provider of choice (for example, [Symbiotic](https://symbiotic.fi/){target=\_blank} for Ethereum). The protocol is designed to finalize transactions deterministically in seconds through a decentralized set of operators.
```

> - **Tanssi/Ethereum Bridge**: Move liquidity to and from Ethereum using the [built-in bridge](/learn/tanssi/tanssi-ethereum-bridge/){target=\_blank} based on Snowbridge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tanssi/Ethereum Bridge**: Move liquidity to and from Ethereum using the [built-in bridge](/learn/tanssi/tanssi-ethereum-bridge/){target=\_blank} based on Snowbridge.
```

> - **Key Integrations**: appchains built with Tanssi can access key infrastructural components alongside block production in a fully automated and standardized way. Tanssi-powered appchains come with built-in support for crucial tools such as wallets, block explorers, indexers, RPC providers, and more, saving developers the effort of dealing with these integrations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Key Integrations**: Appchains built with Tanssi can access key infrastructural components alongside block production in a fully automated and standardized way. Tanssi-powered appchains come with built-in support for essential tools, including wallets, block explorers, indexers, RPC providers, and more, saving developers the effort of integrating these components. 
```

> - **Modular Blockchain Framework**: appchains built with Tanssi can use a modular blockchain framework called [Substrate](https://docs.polkadot.com/develop/parachains/intro-polkadot-sdk/){target=\_blank}, which enables developers to quickly and easily build optimized and customizable blockchains for any use case. Tanssi handles most infrastructural complexities, allowing developers to focus on their appchain's custom logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Modular Blockchain Framework**: Appchains built with Tanssi can use a modular blockchain framework called [Substrate](https://docs.polkadot.com/develop/parachains/intro-polkadot-sdk/){target=\_blank}, which enables developers to quickly and easily build optimized and customizable blockchains for any use case. Tanssi handles most infrastructural complexities, allowing developers to focus on their appchain's custom logic.
```

| Aspect                   | The Tanssi Solution                                                                                                               |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Deployment Time          | - Minutes to deploy<br/> - Faster time to market                                                                                          |
| Block production         | - Sequencing as a service<br/>- Decentralized set of sequencers by design                                                         |
| Security                 | - Ethereum-grade security from the start                                                                                          |
| Finality/Settlement      | - Deterministic<br/>- Finality in seconds                                                                                         |
| Cost                     | - Registration bond + Pay-as-you-go model                                                                                         |

> | Customizability          | - Choose the governance mechanism that better suits your project<br/> - Modular framework<br/>- Full runtime customizability<br/> |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Customizability          | - Choose the governance mechanism that best suits your project<br/> - Modular framework<br/>- Full runtime customizability<br/> |
```
